Backup
======

At work, I stored all my important data on the lab's server which
(obviously) was backed up once a day.  At home, on my personal laptop I
haven't had a systematic backup solution.  Now I'm changing this.


Everyday backup with Obnam
--------------------------

I decided that I will backup my laptop's important data on my home
file-server.  It's a `DNS-320 ShareCenter`_ with 2x1TB disk in RAID 1.
Naturally, this won't save me in case of theft or fire in my house, but I
will deal with the off-site backup problem later, when a local backup
problem is solved.

For my backups I use `Obnam`_.  My configuration file ``~/.obnam.conf`` is
qute simple::
    
    [config]
    repository = /media/nas/backup
    log = /home/dwagner/.obnam/obnam.log
    exclude = /home/dwagner/temp, /home/dwagner/pictures

To backup I run::

    $ obnam backup $HOME

which takes a couple of minutes.  Occasionally I make obnam forget the old
files::

    $ obnam forget --keep=14d

Of course I could put this in a little script and use ``cron`` or something
to run the backup regularly, but I do it manually for a while to gain some
experience.

I exclude the temporary files in my home directory because it just contains
all kinds of junk I don't really care loosing.  I also don't backup this way
the ``pictures`` directory, since I secure my photos in there differently.


Photo backup with git-annex
---------------------------

I store my personal photo collection in a `git-annex`_ repository.  I have
at least two copies of all the pictures (one on the file server and one on a
USB HDD dedicated for this purpose).  A copy of the recent photos, usually
the current year's are on my laptop as well.  I noticed that these are the
pictures I access the most frequently, mainly showing them to friends and
family.  If I need to go back earlier in time, I can have those photos from
home in a day (or when I go home), but not instantly from my laptop.  This
works for me, because the SSD on my laptop is not that spacious, and I don't
want to store all my photos on it.

When I download new pictures from my camera I do ``git-annex sync`` across
the picture repositories making sure that my precious memories are well
preserved.

.. _DNS-320 ShareCenter: https://legacy.us.dlink.com/pages/product.aspx?id=5182449a065f43329cc66a09d43b1c79
.. _Obnam: http://liw.fi/obnam
.. _git-annex: http://git-annex.branchable.com
