Pelican up and running
======================

:tags: pelican
:category: tech

I decided to start blogging again.  I wanted to move away from `Blogspot
<http://www.blogspot.com>`_ and write posts using some markup in ``vi`` and
publish them as static HTML.  I looked into many static blog generators and
I ended up choosing `Pelican <http://getpelican.com>`_.

The steps in the documentation worked fine, I had my blog running in about
2 mins.  I decided to separate the site generation in two different
repositories

1. https://github.com/wagdav/thewagner.net contains the posts in RST files
   and the neccessary config files for Pelican.

2. https://github.com/wagdav/wagdav.github.com contains the actual HTML
   source and receieves only automatic updates from the first repository.
   This is set up to generate a `User Github Page
   <http://pages.github.com/>`_.

On my laptop I have the clone of these two repositories as::

    ~/blog/thewagner.net/
    ~/blog/wagdav.github.com/

I configured Pelican to place its output in ``../wagdav.github.com``.  I
needed to make a small adjustment in the generated ``Makefile``, to prevent
the ``make clean`` command destroying the git repository in the output
directory and deleting the files needed for Github Pages.  So now the
``clean`` target is:

.. code-block:: make

    clean:
        @find $(OUTPUTDIR) -mindepth 1 -not -iwholename '*/.git*' \
                                       -not -name 'README.md' \
                                       -not -name 'CNAME' \

which does the job just fine.

The next steps are to import posts from my `old blog
<http://aventuresalausanne.blogspot.com>`_ and change the default style.  I
want to have something that uses `Twitter Bootstrap
<https://getbootstrap.com>`_.
