---
title: Think paper
---

Thinking using a computer is hard.  First, a computer is full of distractions,
but let's say we can [eliminate those]({filename}2016-07-20-Working-habits.rst).
Second, using the conventional input such as mouse and a keyboard, anything
more complex than a character or a mouse click is difficult to communicate to
the computer.  Where's the button for my latest vague idea? Or where should I
click to record an abstract concept?

As an experiment, let's say you're learning Math.  Try recording digitally
Pythagoras's famous formula using the device you're reading this post at:

$$
a^2 + b^2 = c^2
$$

Was it easy?  In case you haven't reached for your sleek tablet, opened your
cloud-based note taking app which applies instant handwriting recognition and
provides search functionality on [Wolfram
Alpha](https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=pythagorean+theorem) you may
continue reading.  But let's say you type in the equation somehow.  How do you
attach a visual representation to the theorem?  Maybe you can even jot down a
simple proof?  Can you represent your thought process as you're working through
all this?

[Since at least 1968][Engelbart] human-machine interface designers want to
increase the value created by an intellectual worker provided with a screen, a
keyboard and a mouse.  They actually did a pretty good job.  Great digital
tools help us to make beautifully typeset documents, videos, music and many
more.  In general, computers helps us enormously in _doing_, but I believe they
inhibit us in _thinking_.  Most of our thinking [involve figurative or imagery
terms][Kay] and these [representations of thought][BretVictor] are very
difficult to capture digitally.  The way we interface with digital tools is
simply too slow for doing fast iterations on a new vague idea that was just
born in our head.

Imagine you are working on a chart for your next presentation.  Take a pen and
a piece of paper and in only a couple of minutes you can record five different
versions your idea of that figure.  You discard three because you can see
immediately that they don't communicate what you wish to express.  In the next
minute you realize that the remaining two versions could be combined into a
completely new one you hadn't considered before!  In less then five minutes the
sixth version of your graph must be something solid.  Maybe not perfect, but
it's worth transforming your sketch into a digital figure.  If you skip the
initial paper sketches, how far do you get in PowerPoint in five minutes?  I'm
usually browsing on a support forum trying to figure out how to do a certain
operation.  If I'm lucky I get fancy bar chart in half an hour.  I don't like
it, but I'm already _out of ideas_ how to make it better.

When we find, for example, an influential talk on YouTube with meticulously
prepared slides, what we see is the linear, condensed end result of a very
personal, mostly non-linear thinking process.  What we tend to forget is that
_creating_ is exactly that process and not the act of typing the next slide in
PowerPoint.

I believe that in spite of the tremendous success of digitalization the
_thinking_ is still better done offline, with pen and paper.  I find that these
simple tools allow me to record and process my ideas the fastest.  I cannot
show off [beautifully decorated Moleskin notebooks][BulletJournal] with charts
and diagrams.  I mainly scribble, draw boxes and potato-shaped thingies then I
connect them with lines.

If you [think for a living][Knowledge_worker], think paper.  Don't stare at
your big computer screens and try to come up with something smart by pressing
some keys and clicking around.  Get a piece of paper and record your thoughts
with a pen.  Draw, write, doodle.  Give your ideas a structure on paper first
then use digital tools after some initial iterations and reflection.

[Kay]: https://youtu.be/p2LZLYcu_JY?t=53m30s
[BulletJournal]: http://bulletjournal.com/
[FutureOfProgramming]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8pTEmbeENF4
[Engelbart]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yJDv-zdhzMY
[Knowledge_worker]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_worker
[BretVictor]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=agOdP2Bmieg
[BulletJournal]: https://lifehacker.com/the-bullet-journal-minus-the-hype-is-actually-a-reall-1786382012
