---
title: Kevlar
---

Previously, I distilled the [essence of a software delivery
pipeline](/blog/2020/01/07/the-essence-of-a-cicd-pipeline/) and argued that a
transformation step that builds or tests a piece of code can be viewed as a
function.  Functions compose according to well-defined mathematical rules and
they are a suitable model for defining arbitrary pipelines.  Instead of
talking about build tasks, jobs, stages and workflows, the build pipeline
could be a function that takes the source code as argument and returns build
artifacts.

Does a build automation system using these concepts exist?  If yes, is it
practical to use?  In this article I'm trying to answer these questions.

# Programming in YAML

For almost two years I was part of a team building a build automation system
for [Pix4D](https://pix4d.com), a medium-sized organization with:

* Few dozen developers
* Handful of projects
* Couple of programming languages

We wanted a system to build our software products on all the major desktop
and mobile platforms.  A few years back when the project started the scene of
managed build automation tools was less exiting than today: TravisCI was a a
major player, GitLab was on the rise, GitHub Actions and CircleCI didn't
exist.

For various reasons we ruled out the available hosted options and we deployed
[Concourse CI](https://concourse-ci.org/) in our data centers.  Concourse
served us well: today Pix4D's continous integration system builds more
libraries and products than ever.  Concourse uses YAML for describing its
pipelines which model the software delivery process.  And YAML started to
sprout everywhere.

Although YAML is used to configure virtually all build automation systems its
limitations become apparent when you write a pipeline for any reasonably
complex software project.  Using only numbers, strings, lists and associative
arrays pipeline definitions are verbose and repetitive.

To allow for reusing pipeline code all build automation systems introduced
ad-hoc concepts and workarounds:

* [YAML anchors](https://concourse-ci.org/config-basics.html#yaml-tips-and-tricks)
* [Templates](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/pipelines/process/templates)
* [Pipeline Variables](https://circleci.com/docs/2.0/pipeline-variables/)
* [Reusable build tasks](https://github.com/vito/oci-build-task)
* [Orbs](https://circleci.com/orbs/)

Additionaly, all build automation systems provide control flow operators such
as conditionals, loops and other [special
constructs](https://circleci.com/blog/circleci-matrix-jobs/) to express, for
example, matrix builds.  Ultimately the pipeline configuration becomes a custom
built [implicitly functional programming
language](/blog/2019/12/20/functions-in-disguise/) using YAML's syntax.

In programming we reduce repetition using methods, functions and procedures.
We organize our code in modules and packages for sharing and reuse.  Let's try
to use these concepts to express software delivery pipelines.

# Enter Kevlar

I found programming in YAML frustrating and I wanted to explore how a build
pipeline would look like in a general-purpose programming language.  Project
Kevlar was born.

In Kevlar you expess your build pipelines using Haskell functions.  A step that
[builds Kevlar itself][KevlarPipeline] looks like this:

```haskell
build repo = do
  src <- clone repo
  img <- Kaniko.build
    "kevlar-builder"
    "docker/kevlar-builder"
    [Need src ""]
  shell
    ["./ci/build.sh"]
    [ Need src "",
      Image img,
    ]
```

This function takes the source repository as a parameter and describes the
following actions:

* Clone the source repository.
* Run [Kaniko](https://github.com/GoogleContainerTools/kaniko) to build a
  Docker image described by Dockerfile in the source repository.
* Start a container from the build image and execute the build script.

The `Need` argument of the functions express data dependencies explicitly.  We
need the cloned repository to build the Docker image because the `Dockerfile`
is found there.  Similarly, because the build script is running in a container
it needs both the source code checked out and the container's image built.

The syntax may be unusual, but it's just regular Haskell code.  This could have
been easily written in YAML with equal clarity, so why bother with Haskell?  We
will see the advantages of using real programming language constructs when we
build more complicated workflows.

Let's continue building Kevlar's own pipeline by adding a publish step:

```haskell
publish repo binary = do
  src <- clone repo
  img <- Kaniko.build
    "kevlar-publish"
    "docker/kevlar-publish"
    [Need src ""]
  shell
    ["./ci/publish.sh"]
    [ Need binary "build",
      Need src "",
      Image img,
      Secret "GITHUB_ACCESS_TOKEN"
    ]
```

The `publish` function takes the address of the source repository and the build
binary. The steps are similar to the that of the `build` function:

* Clone the source repository.
* Build a Docker image with the tools required for releasing the binary artifacts.
* Start a container from the publish image and execute the publish script.

With the `build` and `publish` functions we can succinctly define Kevlar's
build-and-release pipeline:

```haskell
buildAndPublish src = build src >>= publish src
```

This function, which composes `build` and `publish` using the monadic bind
operator, actually works it does what you'd expect: the pipeline builds and
publishes the build binaries running both the build and the publish steps in
dedicated Docker containers.

There's more to this pipeline definition than fancy syntax and cryptic
operators.  Let's see what happens when we execute Kevlar's delivery pipeline.

# Automatic parallelism

The pipeline `buildAndPublish` we've built in the previous section defines the
following graph of dependencies:

```text
           ↗ build image  → compile ↘ 
clone repo                            publish 
           ↘        build image     ↗ 

```

This figure reveals interesting optimization opportunities:

* Clone the repository once and share the local copy between image building
  steps 
* Run the image building steps in parallel

which we wouldn't be able to exploit if we naively executed the steps as they
appear in the pipeline's source code.  Kevlar avoids executing the same action
twice and uses as much parallelism as possible.  The user only defines data
dependencies using the `Need` parameter and the [parallelism is
automatic](/blog/2020/02/29/parallel-mindset/).  This idea is not new: for
example build systems (make, ninja, etc.) track dependencies among build steps
and schedule as many of them as they can on the available processors.

Yet today's popular build automation systems require the user to explicitly
choose between sequential or parallel execution when designing the pipeline.
Concepts like tasks, steps, jobs are introduced with an emphasis of execution
order instead of capturing [the
semantics](/blog/2020/01/07/the-essence-of-a-cicd-pipeline/) of transformation
step in the software delivery process.

# Discovering Nix

# Summary

Frustrated by the verbose YAML configuration used by popular build automation
systems I wrote Kevlar where the pipeline configuration is expressed in a real
programming language.

Pipelines are functions without explicit control flow. With some help from
great libraries and compiles parallelism is automatic.

We'd like to choose a build automation system with the following properties:

* _Isolation_: Dependencies are explicitly specified, in other words _pinned_.
  System libraries of the build nodes do not leak into the final artifact.

* _Performance_: Rebuild only component that changed and reuse previously built
  artifacts, if possible.

* _Easy to get started:_ A new project is easy to introduce into the build
  automation framework.

* _Easy to share_: Standard linters and checks are easy to configure, their
  configuration is easy to share within the organization.

# Create and deploy artifacts

Independently of your domain and programming language of choice, software
delivery can be described as a two-step process:

1. Create artifacts
1. Deploy artifacts

For example, if you develop a desktop application in C++, your artifacts are
the compiled executables that passed all the tests and packaged in a
platform-specific format. During the deployment step you upload the packaged
binaries to your download page or to an app store.

If you run a web application in the cloud, your artifacts may be Docker images
which you deploy by pushing them to an image registry and asking your container
orchestrator to update the deployments.

If you use multiple pre-production environments or advanced deployment schemes,
you may have many deployment steps for the _same_ artifact.

Isolation:

* goal: control your dependencies
* containers are popular, but they don't compose
* workaround for non-composability: image layers base -> compilers -> linters
* you lost when you type `apk add <mypackage>` (too tempting)

CI/CD steps:

* Two steps:
  1. Build artifacts

    * gathering and transforming data
    * "morally" side-effect free (refer to Haxl talk)
    * only dependencies matter, everything else can be re-ordered

  1. Deploy artifacts

    * take action
    * should work from anywhere!

* Be tool agnostic: VM, bare metal (you'll be always hybrid)
* Don't comporomise on these two steps: avoid tools that talk about specific
  orchestrator systems, or only talk about containers

Hosted CI systems

* Your delivery pipeline is part of your core buisness. Don't outsource it.
* Your delivery pipeline is your next legacy system
* You should be able to build, deploy from your own machine with _minimal_
  ceremony (no extra installs etc.)

  1. checkout code
  1. build
  1. install

* Deploy from your PC is _not_ on-premises workers
* Only what is not core buisness: react to source code events, run pipeline,
  send notifications
* analogy git vs. gmail


[HaxlTalk]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sT6VJkkhy0o

[TektonPipelines]: https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/master/docs/tutorial.md
[Kevlar]: https://github.com/wagdav/kevlar
[KevlarPipeline]: https://github.com/wagdav/kevlar/blob/master/.kevlar/config.hs
