---
title: Year 2020 in review
---

This blog has no specific theme,  I write about topics that are on my mind at
the moment.  In this post I reconstruct a story arc of the year and link to
articles I wrote in 2020.

During the holiday break in 2019 I wrote about [functions in
disguise][Functions].  I argued that we should use pure functions in software
configuration files instead of letting them develop idiosyncratic concepts and
custom rules.

I was particularly frustrated by the configuration of build automation systems
(also called continuous integration, continuous delivery systems).  In January
I was researching the [essence of a software delivery pipeline][Essence] and I
picked on the concepts of some popular tools.  I argued that a software
delivery pipeline could be viewed as a function without introducing other,
ambiguous concepts.  To validate this idea I wrote [Kevlar][Kevlar], an
experimental build automation system where pipelines are functions.  In Kevlar,
[contrary to many of our tools][Parallel], parallelism is completely automatic.

While thinking about software delivery pipelines I [discovered Nix][Nix] which
now I use to configure all computers in my [homelab][Homelab].  Using Nix I
made this blog's deployment [automatic][Deployment1] and
[reproducible][Deployment2]. I believe Nix is the best tool today for
configuring physical machines and for building software delivery pipelines.

In the second part of the year I've been learning Rust. I explored its
[concurrency primitives][Concurrency] and in December I completed the [Advent
of Code][AoC] in Rust too.

In summary, the articles I wrote over the past year fall in three broad
categories:

* Concepts and configuration of build automation software
* Infrastructure and Nix
* Learning the Rust language

Looking forward to seeing what 2021 brings!

Happy New Year!

[Functions]: {filename}2019-12-20-Functions-in-disguise.markdown
[Essence]: {filename}2020-01-07-Essence-of-build-pipeline.markdown
[Kevlar]: {filename}2020-10-18-Kevlar.markdown
[Parallel]: {filename}2020-02-29-Parallel-mindset.markdown
[Nix]: {filename}2020-04-30-Exploring-Nix.markdown
[Homelab]: {filename}2020-05-31-Homelab.markdown
[Deployment1]: {filename}2020-07-03-Blog-deployment.markdown
[Deployment2]: {filename}2020-12-06-Blog-deployment-update.markdown
[Concurrency]: {filename}2020-07-10-Rust-Concurrency-patterns.markdown
[AoC]: {filename}2020-12-25-Advent-of-Code.markdown
