---
title: Kevlar
---

Previously, I distilled the [essence of a software delivery
pipeline](/blog/2020/01/07/the-essence-of-a-cicd-pipeline/) and I argued that a
transformation step that builds or tests a piece of code can be viewed as a
function.  Functions compose according to well-defined mathematical rules and
they are a suitable model for defining arbitrary pipelines.  Instead of talking
about build tasks, jobs, stages and workflows, the build pipeline would be a
single function that takes the source code as argument and returns build
artifacts.

Does such a build automation system exist?  If yes, is it practical to use?  In
this article I'm trying to answer these questions.

# Create and deploy artifacts

Independently of your domain and programming language of choice, software
delivery can be described as a two-step process:

1. Create artifacts
1. Deploy artifacts

For example, if you develop a desktop application in C++, your artifacts are
the compiled executables that passed all the tests and packaged in a
platform-specific format. During the deployment step you upload the packaged
binaries to your download page or to an app store.

If you run a web application in the cloud, your artifacts may be Docker images
which you deploy by pushing them to an image registry and asking your container
orchestrator to update the deployments.

If you use multiple pre-production environments or advanced deployment schemes,
you may have many deployment steps for the _same_ artifact.

# Requirements

Let's consider a build automation system in a medium-sized organization with:

* Few dozen developers
* Handful of projects
* Couple of programming languages

I have personal experience with organizations of such characteristics, but I
also believe that this intermediate size is interesting to consider.  For a
single developer's hobby project any build automation tool will do just fine; a
large corporation will develop and maintain their own system.

We'd like to choose a build automation system with the following properties:

* _Hermetic builds:_ All dependencies are explicitly specified, in other words
  _pinned_.  System dependencies of the build nodes do not leak into the final
  artifact.

* _Performance_: Rebuild only component that changed and reuse previously built
  artifacts, if possible.

* _Easy to get started:_ A new project is easy to introduce into the build
  automation framework.

* _Easy to share_: Standard linters and checks are easy to configure, their
  configuration is easy to share within the organization.

* Modularity

  * Structure the configuration: YAML is really, really bad
  * Bring in new functionality: ORBs, Concourse resources
  * Use functions!

Isolation:

* goal: control your dependencies
* containers are popular, but they don't compose
* workaround for non-composability: image layers base -> compilers -> linters
* you lost when you type `apk add <mypackage>` (too tempting)

CI/CD steps:

* Two steps:
  1. Build artifacts

    * gathering and transforming data
    * "morally" side-effect free (refer to Haxl talk)
    * only dependencies matter, everything else can be re-ordered

  1. Deploy artifacts

    * take action
    * should work from anywhere!

* Be tool agnostic: VM, bare metal (you'll be always hybrid)
* Don't comporomise on these two steps: avoid tools that talk about specific
  orchestrator systems, or only talk about containers

Hosted CI systems

* Your delivery pipeline is part of your core buisness. Don't outsource it.
* Your delivery pipeline is your next legacy system
* You should be able to build, deploy from your own machine with _minimal_
  ceremony (no extra installs etc.)

  1. checkout code
  1. build
  1. install

* Deploy from your PC is _not_ on-premises workers
* Only what is not core buisness: react to source code events, run pipeline,
  send notifications
* analogy git vs. gmail

Kevlar

* black-ops project for a while
* grew out of frustration with Concourse at work
* [Kevlar](https://github.com/wagdav/kevlar)
* made it expressive, but not performant, still needs Dockerfiles

Found Nix

* Everything Kevlar wanted to be, but better

[HaxlTalk]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sT6VJkkhy0o
