---
title: Practicing writing
---

In the past years I've been learning about technical writing.  In this article
I review two books that helped me to improve my writing skills. Then, I present
how I practice writing at home and at work.

# Discovering writing

As a scientist I published technical reports, journal papers and even a 200
pages long [doctoral thesis][Thesis], but I knew little about _writing_, a
communication skill that can be learned and improved.  I left academia and I
got a job as a software engineer.  I stopped following science and started
learning programming languages and study industry best practices.

One summer I read [REWORK][Rework], a book written by Basecamp's founders.  The
chapter _Hire great writers_ explains the authors' preference in hiring
candidates who can demonstrate great writing skills because clear and efficient
written communication is essential in their distributed and asynchronous
working style.  I was an employee and I didn't plan to hire anybody, but the
emphasis on high-quality writing inspired me to become a better writer.

I looked at my own [working habits]({filename}2016-07-20-Working-habits.rst)
and, somewhat naively, realized the obvious: _I write all the time_.  Instant
messaging, code commits, pull-requests, code reviews, project proposals,
incident reports are all a form of writing.  I wanted to learn what good
writing is and how to write well.

I searched for resources targeted at  practitioners who write technical text.
In the next sections I present a two books from which I learned the most.

# Book: BUGS In Writing

The book [BUGS In Writing by Lyn Dupré][BUGSinWriting] is a catalog of common
mistakes in writing.  It comprises short, easily digestible segments.  Each
segment presents a principle to make your technical writing clear and lucid.
The principles are illustrated by witty example phrases and numerous cat
photos.

I encountered this book through a reference in the Chris Okasaki's thesis
[Purely Functional Data Structures][OkasakiThesis]:

> I was extremely fortunate to have had excellent English teachers in high
> school. Lori Huenink deserves special recognition; her writing and public
> speaking classes are undoubtedly the most valuable classes I have ever taken,
> in any subject. In the same vein, I was lucky enough to read my wife's copy
> of Lyn Dupre's BUGS in Writing just as I was starting my thesis. If your
> career involves writing in any form, you owe it to yourself to buy a copy of
> this book.

When I read this recommendation I immediately ordered a copy.  _BUGS in
Writing_ is a fantastic handbook.  When I have doubts about a specific word or
expression I search for advise in the book.

To give a taste of Dupré's style, here's an example from the segment _Impact_,
where you learn about the one of the most overused, ugly words in the English
language:

> There are only two pleasing uses of _impact_: to denote a forceful collision,
> and to mean packed or wedged in.

Here the principle is that:

> [...] you should not use _impact_ when you mean _influence_ or _effect_, and
> you certainly should not use _impact_ when you mean _affect_, because
> impacting people is incredibly impolite.

When you learn about such principles you develop ear for detecting bugs in
texts and your tolerance for buzzwords and corporate jargon decreases.

# Book: On Writing Well

William Zinsser [On Writing Well][WritingWell] is really what its subtitle
claims: the classic guide to writing nonfiction.  This book showed me how a
professional writer thinks about writing methods, style, structure and genres.
The book has a chapter on writing about science and technology but it also
treats business writing, writing about arts, sports and even memoirs.

Zinsser warns about clutter, every piece of text that doesn't do useful work.
He suggests to strip every sentence to its barest bones: delete pompous words,
redundant adjectives, jargon and replace laborious phrases with a short words
that mean the same thing.

Writing a clean sentence is hard work.  And the work is non-linear and
iterative: _rewriting is the essence of writing_ as Zinsser puts it.

# Writing a blog

In 2013 I published the [first article][PostHello] on this blog. I wanted to
write, but I didn't know what to write about.  A common dilemma for many
aspiring writer.  In a few years I published a handful of short articles on
random topics.  Some of them were meta-articles on [setting up this
blog][PostPelican].  Some were as simple as connecting a [LED and a
button][PostLED] to a Raspberry Pi.  Unexpectedly, I had a few "hits" too: many
friends liked the article on [my working habits][PostWorkingHabits].

Around 2017 I changed my writing strategy.  Instead of overthinking the subject
of my next article, I decided that my hobby projects should end with an entry
on my blog.  While working on a project I take notes and write outlines.  When
I'm finished (or bored) I have a seed of a new article.  I still have to work
hard to make my notes into a coherent story, but I feel that goal, the
published article, is reachable.

# Writing at work

In my team we communicate code improvements via pull-requests, changesets that
typically comprise few dozen to few hundred lines of code.  We prefer small
batches of code changes that are easy to understand, review and the risk of
breaking existing systems is lower than if we changed everything at once.  But
through these incremental changes it's hard to see the context in which a given
pull-request makes sense.

I felt the team needed a document that shows how each code change fits into the
story of the project.  Earlier, my team had considered writing [change request
documents][RFC] but some felt it bureaucratic and, frankly, we didn't know how to
write them well.

Last December at work I started new project that required changes in many
subsystems.  I described my implementation plan on the company wiki.  In few
sentences I created a _design document_.

I started the implementation and as I learned more about the problem domain I
refined the design and I updated the document with my progress.  If you'd read
the document you would have known what's been done and what's left to do. The
wiki page became a _project page_.

Of course my initial design had holes and I discovered traps and dead ends.  I
recorded my failings on the same wiki page which evolved into an _experience
report_.

When I finished the implementation I collected instructions for operators, the
support team and for other developers, transforming the page into _project
documentation_.

A few months later when I reread this page I found a _historical record_ that
explains why and how we arrived to state we have today.

During this process I found few practices useful:

* I rewrite the same document as we work on the project.  The document is
  always the entry point for all project-relevant information.

* I write prose with complete sentences to build context.  A few words with
  bullet points, list of ticket IDs are insufficient.

* I often reference related content.  There's no need to repeat what's
  explained elsewhere.

* I share every major revision with my colleagues asking for reviews and
  suggestions.

The time spent evolving this page was worth it.  I felt that the state of the
page reflected the stage of the project.  If a project needs long pages to
explain, it's too big.  If a few words can't express what I'm doing, the
project is ill-defined or I lack some knowledge to execute it.

# Summary

I've been writing during my whole career, but only lately I've been cultivating
my writing skills.  I practice writing in my free time and professionally.  I'm
documenting my hobby projects and software experiments on my blog and write
"evolving" documents on the company's internal wiki.

[BUGSinWriting]: https://www.amazon.com/BUGS-Writing-Revised-Guide-Debugging/dp/020137921X
[OkasakiThesis]: https://www.cs.cmu.edu/~rwh/theses/okasaki.pdf
[PostHello]: {filename}2013-03-06-hello-world.rst
[PostLED]: {filename}2013-06-26-Led-and-button.rst
[PostPelican]: {filename}2013-03-08-Pelican.rst
[PostWorkingHabits]: {filename}2016-07-20-Working-habits.rst
[Rework]: https://basecamp.com/books/rework
[Thesis]: https://infoscience.epfl.ch/record/186309
[WritingWell]: https://www.amazon.com/Writing-Well-Classic-Guide-Nonfiction/dp/0060891548
[RFC]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Change_request
