---
title: Year 2023 in review
---

This post is a short summary of the articles I wrote in 2023.

At the beginning of the year reviewed Winston Royce's 1970 paper on [Managing
the development of large software systems][Royce].  This paper is list of
suggestions about what makes a software project succeed.  Perhaps at places the
language is archaic, but most of Royce's observations still apply today.

I spent a few hours every month to improve my [Homelab][HomelabGitHub].  I
started hacking on some spare computers at home [in 2019][HomelabFirstCommit],
because I was interested in configuration management systems such as Ansible,
Salt and Puppet.  Then, I discovered [Nix][Nix] which became the most important
tool to build all my projects and to configure my servers.

This year I configured [automatic deployment][Homelab] for all my servers at
home.  This includes a [Raspberry Pi][RPi] for which building software using
freely available build servers such as GitHub Actions is non-trivial.

Finally, as in the past few years, in December I spent my free time solving the
[Advent of Code][AoC2023] puzzles.

Thanks for reading and happy 2024!

[Royce]: {filename}/2023-02-28-Review-Royce1970.markdown
[RPi]: {filename}/2023-11-20-Raspberry-Pi-Github-Actions.markdown
[Homelab]: {filename}/2023-11-25-Homelab-deployment.markdown
[Nix]: {filename}/2020-04-30-Exploring-Nix.markdown
[HomelabGitHub]: https://github.com/wagdav/homelab
[HomelabFirstCommit]: https://github.com/wagdav/homelab/commit/8c697472504f92e34e93dc8d58a3dea309d5b6b6
[AoC2023]: {filename}/2023-12-25-Advent-of-Code.markdown
