---
title: Year 2024 in review
---

I started the 2024 with an intense training program for the [20 km of
Lausanne](https://training.thewagner.net/blog/2024/04/28/20-km-de-lausanne-2024/).
I moved to a new place, I rode my [new
bike](https://training.thewagner.net/blog/2024/03/28/cervelo-caledonia-5/) as
much as I could and I started a new job.  Fortunately, next to all these
changes in my life, I could still find some time for writing.

# Articles

In April, I [reviewed][Stupidity] _The Stupidity Paradox_, a book exploring the
role of functional stupidity in contemporary organizations.  I liked writing
this article because it helped me to internalize the content of the book.

At work, I heard many complaints about _software quality_, but nobody could
define what quality meant for them.  I decided to [review the chapters on
quality][Quality] from _Facts and Fallacies of Software Engineering_.  When I
shared this post with a friend, he immediately suggested me to read the _The
Zen and Art of Motorcycle Maintenance_. In this book the protagonist becomes
insane during his quest to define quality.  [In the article][Quality] I cite
seven attributes which form a working definition of quality for software teams
without risking madness.

In the summer, I had some time between jobs to tinker in my [Homelab][Homelab].
In [this article][Camera] I explain how I use my Raspberry Pi Camera module with
NixOS.

Finally, as in the past few years, in December I spent my free time solving the
[Advent of Code][AoC2024] puzzles.

# Books

I read Liu Cixin's _Remembrance of Earth's Past_ series in English: _The
Three-Body Problem_, _The Dark Forest_ and _Death's End_.  I found these books
less captivating than the _Expanse_, the last big science fiction series I had
read.  Instead, I enjoyed watching the Netflix TV adaptation.

During vacation, I found Jack London's _Martin Eden_ on a public bookshelf.  A
random pick that became my best read of the year: after a thousand pages of
science fiction the story of a struggling autodidact writer came as a breath of
fresh air.

Thanks for reading my blog and happy 2025!

[Stupidity]: {filename}/2024-04-19-Review-Stupidity-Paradox.markdown
[Quality]: {filename}/2024-06-25-Software-Quality.markdown
[Camera]: {filename}/2024-07-31-Raspberry-Pi-Camera-NixOS.markdown
[Homelab]: https://github.com/wagdav/homelab
[x1]: {filename}/2024-09-10-x1.markdown
[AoC2024]: {filename}/2024-12-25-Advent-of-code.markdown
