---
title: Homelab turns five
---

Today I celebrate the fifth anniversary of my Homelab.  Five years ago, as a
COVID-19 lockdown project, I [learned Nix][LearningNix2020] and [installed
NixOS on all my computers at home][Homelab].

Perhaps my Homelab doesn't compete in sophistication with some you find on
[Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/homelab/) but I consider it a forerunner in
longevity and maintainability.  I attribute this success to the use of Nix,
which I praised in many blog post before.

The 2020 version, which I still run today, doesn't represents the first
generation of my Homelab.  I started to use Ansible back in 2015 because I
disliked the "install and forget" kind of computer configuration.  You install
some packages, you tune some configuration files until the program you want to
use works, then a few weeks or months later you start again because you forget
everything about the configuration process.

In 2015 I built a gitolite server on Debian Linux.  In a year I could control
my Christmas lights using Home Assistant with the entire configuration
represented as code.  I also built a container host with LXC and Ansible worked
okay for my home servers; I never really liked it so I kept searching for
something better: I tried cdist and infratest.

In October 2017 I started writing an Ansible playbook for my laptop.  As far as
I can remember this was the final straw that broke the camel's back.  I felt
that the Ansible playbooks was just an afterthought, installing packages by
hand was always more comfortable and I couldn't build a reliable set of Ansible
tasks and playbooks to configure my laptop using entirely from a Git
repository.  Some partially working Ansible playbooks still sit in my private
infrastructure repository and I gave up on using them.

In 2020 I found Nix and I wrote my first [Homelab post][Homelab2020].  I
seriously believe that if your hobby or job involves managing servers, you
should not use anything but Nix.  But I've done enough Nix evangelism on this
blog and I'd like to steer this discussion in a different direction.

I'd like propose the thesis that conventional configuration systems like
Ansible, Salt, Puppet and Chef build on the wrong primitives.  Rich Hickey
calls this place oriented programming or PLOP for short. What does this mean?

The File System Hierarchy standard mandates PLOP; directories are "places"
where you put binaries, configuration files etc.

One of the primitive operations of Ansible is the [lineinfile][lineinfile]
module which writes the specified line to a file:

```
- name: Ensure 'hello world' is present in a file
  ansible.builtin.lineinfile:
   path: /tmp/greeting
   state: present
```

This seemingly innocent instruction mixes up two concerns: the content you want
to create (good) and to which place should it be written (bad).

[This module][lineinfile] has a few optional parameters like `inserbefore`
`insertafter` which also suggest that the whole design revolves around
_places_: paths and line positions.

Similarly, another basic operation is

```
package
  installed
```

Assuming that the package is implemented for the operating system on the host
you want to control, this may conflict with specific files written somewhere in
the disk.

This also considers your computer as a place: the package is either in the
place or not.

Remember your goal is not to install packages: your goal is to make a computer
do useful things for you: run a webserver, make a program available.  This
might be a subtle difference.

Instead Nix brings a totally different approach, perhaps best explained by an
analogy taken from build systems.

The highest level command is "build me operating system for this server"
(NixOS). Nix combines expressions instead of files and packages.

Despite building on the "wrong primitives" conventional configuration systems
have great success.  Possibly because operators combine them with immutable
practices?

Containers are all the hype, but they have the same problem.  You install a
package, you put files here and there.  In [this earlier
article][ContainersNix] I highlighted some problems of building containes using
Dockerfiles.  Moreover they don't compose: you cannot take an image which has a
specific tool and combine it with a different one. You need to rebuild the
build instructions every single time.

Happy birthday, Homelab!

[LearningNix2020]: {filename}2020-04-30-Exploring-Nix.markdown
[Homelab2020]: {filename}2020-05-31-Homelab.markdown
[ContainersNix]: {filename}/2021-02-25-Container-images-Nix.markdown
[lineinfile]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/lineinfile_module.html
