---
title: Homelab turns five
---

This day marks the fifth anniversary of my Homelab.  Five years ago, as a
COVID-19 lockdown project, I [learned Nix][LearningNix2020] and [installed
NixOS on my home computers][Homelab2020].

While my Homelab may not compete in sophistication with setups you find on
[Reddit](https://www.reddit.com/r/homelab/), I consider it a forerunner in
longevity and maintainability.  I attribute this success to the use of Nix,
which I praised in many blog post before.

The current setup, which remained stable since 2020, doesn't represent the
first generation of my Homelab.  I started to use Ansible back in 2015 because
I had grown frustrated with the "install and forget" approach, where you
configure a system and then quickly forget the details, making future updates
difficult.

In 2015 I built a [Gitolite](https://gitolite.com/gitolite/) server on Debian
Linux.  A year later I could control my Christmas lights using Home Assistant
with the entire configuration represented as code.  I also built a container
host with LXC, an [ownCloud](https://owncloud.com/) instance and a media
server.

In 2017, because Ansible worked reasonably well on my servers, I started
writing a playbook for my primary working laptop.  I wanted to codify my
laptop's configuration but I couldn't build a reliable set of Ansible tasks and
playbooks that worked independently of machine's existing state.  I would
manually install new tools and struggled to document every change in Ansible.
Perhaps I lacked the discipline or I insisted on the wrong approach; eventually
I gave up.  I never finished the configuration scripts for my laptop. The
servers' playbooks gradually stopped working because of the system updates and
other out of band changes.

Over the years I kept looking for a better software configuration system.  I
explored alternatives such as
[cdist](https://www.cdi.st/manual/latest/index.html),
[fabric](https://www.fabfile.org/), and
[propellor](https://joeyh.name/blog/propellor/), but none felt sufficiently
different to Ansible. They often had smaller user communities and more quirks.
I even used [Salt](https://saltproject.io/) professionally and followed
[mgmt](https://github.com/purpleidea/mgmt) for a time.

Finally, in 2020 I discovered Nix and I wrote my first [Homelab
post][Homelab2020] about it.  I firmly believe that if your hobby or job
involves managing servers, you should not use anything but Nix.

Happy birthday, Homelab!

[LearningNix2020]: {filename}2020-04-30-Exploring-Nix.markdown
[Homelab2020]: {filename}2020-05-31-Homelab.markdown
[ContainersNix]: {filename}/2021-02-25-Container-images-Nix.markdown
[lineinfile]: https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/lineinfile_module.html
[37signalsInfra]: https://dev.37signals.com/leaning-imperative/
